# NetTCR-2.1 - Sequence-based prediction of peptide-TCR interacions using CDR1, CDR2 and CDR3 loops 
NetTCR-2.1 is a deep learning model used to predict TCR specificity. NetTCR-2.1 uses convolutional neural networks (CNN) to predict whether a given TCR binds a specific peptide.

The scripts in this repo allow training and testing of models. It is possible to train/test using CDR3 only (with `train_nettcr_cdr3.py` and `test_nettcr_cdr3.py`) or all the CDRs (with `train_nettcr_cdr123.py` and `test_nettcr_cdr123.py`). It is also possible to choose, with the `--chain` option, which chains of the TCRs to use for training.

## Data
The input datasets shoud contain the CDRs and peptide sequences. For the CDR3 training/testing, at least the columns `peptide`, `A3`, `B3` should be present (with headers). For CDR123, the columns should be `peptide`, `A1`,`A2`,`A3`, `B1`, `B2`, `B3`. All the input files shoud be comma-separated.

See `test/train_data` as an example.

The folder `data/`contains the data used to train/validate/test NetTCR-2.1. Th data file contains information about the 6 CDR loops, the V/J genes, the target peptide and HLA. The positive data was retrieved from IEDB, VDJdb 10X genomics and McPAS datasets; the negative data comes from 10X (denoted as `true_neg`) or is generated by mismatching positive TCRs and peptide (denoted as `swapped_neg`). 

The redundancy in the dataset was reduced using Hobohm1 algorithm [1], using the kernel similarity [2] measure and a similarity threshold of 0.95. The data is then split into 6 partitions. 5 partitions can be used for nested cross-validation; the left-out partitions can be used as an external evaluation set. 

## Network training

The inputs files for the training scripts are the training dataset and the validation data, used for early stopping.

Example:

`python src/train_nettcr_cdr3.py --train_data test/train_data --val_data test/val_data --outdir test/models/ --chain ab`

This will generate and save a `.pt` file with the the traiend model. The directory has to be specified with the option `--outdir`.

The other input arguments to the script are `--epochs`, `--learning_rate`, `--verbose`. If a GPU is available, the scritp will detect it and use it. 

## Network testing 
The test scripts can be used to make predictions of test TCRs, using a pre-trained model.

Example:

`python src/test_nettcr_cdr3.py --test_data test/test_data --trained_model test/models/trained_model_cdr3_ab.pt --outdir test/models/ --chain ab`

This will generate and save a `.csv` file with the prediction. The file will be saved in the specified output directory. 

### References
[1] Hobohm, Uwe, et al. "Selection of representative protein data sets." *Protein Science* 1.3 (1992): 409-417.

[2] Shen, Wen-Jun, et al. "Towards a mathematical foundation of immunology and amino acid chains." *arXiv preprint arXiv:1205.6031* (2012).
